Add content (#1309)
trufflesuite/trufflesuite.com: src/blog/three-new-features-on-ganache-to-improve-your-developer-experience/index.md

---

> title: Three new features on Ganache to improve your developer experience

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Three new Ganache features to improve your developer experience
```

In addition, with the migration of Ethereum from PoW to PoS and the separation of the consensus layer from the execution layer, our users have been curious to know how Ganache is impacted and what actions they will need to take. 

The simple answer to this very important question is: although [there are changes to how Ethereum clients will work post-merge](https://consensys.net/blog/ethereum-2-0/the-four-pillars-of-the-merge-to-proof-of-stake-how-ethereum-will-evolve), Ganache users do not need to do anything since these changes to Ethereum will not affect the user and dapp development experience.

In this blog, we’ll touch on 3 of those new features that we've added to Ganache since the Ganache 7 release in January.

## Zero-config mainnet forking now available in the browser

Ganache v7.0 made it possible to run Ganache in the browser, as shown below:

```html
<script src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/ganache@{VERSION}/dist/web/ganache.min.js"></script>

> const options = {};

Reviewer 2: @davidmurdoch thoughts on separating this into two separate blocks since one is HTML (as you noted) but the rest is JS? Something like:

Ganache v7.0 made it possible to run Ganache in the browser. Simply add this script to your HTML:

```html
<script src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/ganache@{VERSION}/dist/web/ganache.min.js"></script>
```
And Ganache is available in your browser for use with:
```javascript
const options = {};
const provider = Ganache.provider(options);
```

const provider = Ganache.provider(options);
```

> Adding the above lines of code would make the Ganache blockchain simulator available in your browser, however, zero-config mainnet forking wasn't available.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Adding the above lines of code would make the Ganache blockchain simulator available in your browser. However, zero-config mainnet forking wasn't yet available.
```

> For some time now, it has been possible to run Ganache on the browser by simply including a minimal  javascript code in your HTML and then accessing the Ganache provider as shown below:

Reviewer: "a minimal javascript code" is a strange phrase. Perhaps reword into something like:

```
Ganache v7.0 made it possible to run Ganache in the browser, as shown below:
```

> ```javascript

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```html
```

> Although adding the above lines of code would make the Ganache blockchain simulator available in your browser, features like the zero configuration mainnet forking wasn’t available.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Adding the above lines of code would make the Ganache blockchain simulator available in your browser, however, zero-config mainnet forking wasn't available.
```

> However, with the latest release, Ganache users can now enjoy this feature in their browser by simply specifying additional options during setup as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since the release of Ganache v7.3.2 users can now utilize this feature in the browser by specifying additional options during setup:
```

```javascript
...

const options = { fork: { network: "mainnet" } }
const provider = Ganache.provider(options);
```

> You can verify that this is working by attempting to fetch the latest block using the **eth_getBlockByNumber** flag as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can verify that this is working by attempting to fetch a mainnet block using the **eth_getBlockByNumber** flag:
```

```javascript

> const latestBlock = await provider.request({ method: "eth_getBlockByNumber", params: ["latest"] });
> console.log(latestBlock); // will be mainnet's "latest" block

Reviewer: ```suggestion
const block = await provider.request({ method: "eth_getBlockByNumber", params: ["0xec4eb0"] });
console.log(block); // will be mainnet's block 15486640
```

```

## Ability to use console.log from Solidity

> If you use the Vyper `print` statement or the Hardhat `console.sol` library contract for printing items to the console, you can now use these tools together with Ganache, as Ganache now understands the Vyper `print` statement, as well as the Hardhat `console.sol` library!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you use Vyper's `print` statement or Hardhat's `console.sol` library contract for printing items to the console, you can now use these tools together with Ganache, as Ganache now understands Vyper's `print` statement, as well as Hardhat's `console.sol` library!
```

> Truffle users aren’t left out either as they can install Ganache's `console.log` library with `npm install @ganache/console.log` and use it in their solidity project as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Truffle users aren’t left out either as they can install Ganache's `console.log` library with `npm install @ganache/console.log` and use it in their Solidity project as follows:
```

> Truffle users aren’t left out either as they can install Ganache's `console.log` library with `npm install @ganache/console.log` and use it in their solidity project as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Development of bative `console.log` support in Truffle is currently in progress, but Truffle users don't have to wait to use this feature, as they can install Ganache's `console.log` library with `npm install @ganache/console.log` and use it in their Solidity project:
```

> ```javascript

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```solidity
```

// SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
pragma solidity ^0.8.13;

import "@ganache/console.log/console.sol";

contract GanacheCoin {
    mapping (address => uint) balances;
    constructor() {
        balances[tx.origin] = 10000;
    }

    function sendCoin(address receiver, uint256 amount) public returns(bool sufficient) {
        if (balances[msg.sender] >= amount) {
            balances[msg.sender] -= amount;
            balances[receiver] += amount;
            console.log("send: %o coins to %o", amount, receiver);
            return true;
        } else {
            return false;
        }
    }
}
```

## New eth_getProof RPC method

> Ganache now supports the **eth_getProof** RPC method which is an important step towards securing layer 2 networks and is specified by [EIP-1186](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-1186). This method returns some useful values, including hashes and proofs associated with the given address and storage keys. This method can be used as shown below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ganache now supports the **eth_getProof** RPC methodm, as specified by [EIP-1186](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-1186). This method returns some useful values, including hashes and proofs associated with the given address and storage keys. This method can be used as shown below:
```

```javascript
const result = provider.request({
  "method": "eth_getProof",
  "params": [
    // the address to query and generate proof for
    "0x7F0d15C7FAae65896648C8273B6d7E43f58Fa842", 
    // optional storage keys to generate proofs for
    ["0x56e81f171bcc55a6ff8345e692c0f86e5b48e01b996cadc001622fb5e363b421"], 
    // the block at which to generate the proof
    "latest" 
  ]
});
```
It should return the following output:

```json
{
  "accountProof": [
    "0xf90211a...0701bc80",
    "0xf90211a...0d832380",
    "0xf90211a...5fb20c80",
    "0xf90211a...0675b80",
    "0xf90151a0...ca08080"
  ],
  "balance": "0x0",
  "codeHash": "0xc5d2460186f7233c927e7db2dcc703c0e500b653ca82273b7bfad8045d85a470",
  "nonce": "0x0",
  "storageHash": "0x56e81f171bcc55a6ff8345e692c0f86e5b48e01b996cadc001622fb5e363b421",
  "storageProof": [
    {
      "key": "0x56e81f171bcc55a6ff8345e692c0f86e5b48e01b996cadc001622fb5e363b421",
      "proof": [
        "0xf90211a...0701bc80",
        "0xf90211a...0d832380"
      ],
      "value": "0x1"
    }
  ]
}
```

## Conclusion

> At Truffle, we remain committed to improving and simplifying the user experience for dapp developers in the Web3 ecosystem by creating developer tools, resources, and educational materials. With the monumental upgrade coming to Ethereum by mid September, we're even more excited and committed to this course.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At Truffle, we remain committed to improving and simplifying the user experience for dapp developers in the Web3 ecosystem by creating developer tools, resources, and educational materials. With the monumental upgrade coming to Ethereum by mid-September, we're even more excited and committed to this course.
```

> To find out more about our suite of developer tools, visit the official [Truffle website](https://trufflesuite.com). If you have questions that you'd like for our team members to answer concerning the merge and how it impacts our products, feel free to start a discussion on our [Github Discussions channel](https://github.com/orgs/trufflesuite/discussions). Finally, don't forget to follow us on [Twitter](https://twitter.com/trufflesuite) for live announcements and updates.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To find out more about our suite of developer tools, visit the official [Truffle website](https://trufflesuite.com). If you have questions about The Merge and how it impacts our products feel free to start a discussion on our [Github Discussions channel](https://github.com/orgs/trufflesuite/discussions). Finally, don't forget to follow us on [Twitter](https://twitter.com/trufflesuite) for live announcements and updates.
```

---
title: Three new Ganache features to improve your developer experience
hide:
  - navigation
---

**By [Kingsley Arinze](https://twitter.com/heydamali)**

> ![The Merge and what it means for Truffle](./what-is-new-in-ganache.jpg)

Reviewer: Remove references to the merge

Since the release of Ganache v7.0 in January, we’ve mostly focused our attention on bug fixes and UX improvements. Recently, we decided to expand our focus to also include new features that will help improve the developer experience for our users.

In this post, we’ll touch on 3 of those new features that we've added to Ganache since the Ganache v7.0 release.

## Zero-config mainnet forking now available in the browser

Ganache v7.0 made it possible to run Ganache in the browser. Simply add this script to your HTML:

```html

> <script src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/ganache@7/dist/web/ganache.min.js"></script>

Reviewer: We do NOT recommend using `@7` as the version, as this will end up using the latest `7` version; which means behavior could potentially change from one page load to the next. Users should pin with a specific version (as you did below). In our README we note that `the {VERSION} in the above path needs to be replaced with a version number or tag that is listed in [npm](https://www.npmjs.com/package/ganache?activeTab=versions)`.

```

And Ganache is available in your browser for use with:

```javascript
const options = {};
const provider = Ganache.provider(options);
```

Adding the above lines of code would make the Ganache blockchain simulator available in your browser. However, zero-config mainnet forking wasn't yet available.

Since the release of Ganache v7.3.2 users can now utilize this feature in the browser by specifying additional options during setup:

```html
<script src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/ganache@7.3.2/dist/web/ganache.min.js"></script>
```

```javascript
const options = { fork: { network: "mainnet" } }
const provider = Ganache.provider(options);
```

> You can verify that this is working by attempting to fetch a mainnet block using the **eth_getBlockByNumber** flag:

Reviewer: `eth_getBlockByNumber` isn't a flag, it is a method.

```javascript
const block = await provider.request({ method: "eth_getBlockByNumber", params: ["0xec4eb0"] });
console.log(block); // will be mainnet's block 15486640
```

## Ability to use console.log from Solidity

> If you use Vyper's `print` statement or Hardhat's `console.sol` library contract for printing items to the console, you can now use these tools together with Ganache, as Ganache now understands Vyper's `print` statement, as well as Hardhat's `console.sol` library!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you use Vyper's `print` statement or Hardhat's `console.sol` library contract for writing values to stdout, you can now use these tools together with Ganache, as Ganache now understands Vyper's `print` statement, as well as Hardhat's `console.sol` library!
```

```solidity
// SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
pragma solidity ^0.8.13;

import "@ganache/console.log/console.sol";

contract GanacheCoin {
    mapping (address => uint) balances;
    constructor() {
        balances[tx.origin] = 10000;
    }

    function sendCoin(address receiver, uint256 amount) public returns(bool sufficient) {
        if (balances[msg.sender] >= amount) {
            balances[msg.sender] -= amount;
            balances[receiver] += amount;
            console.log("send: %o coins to %o", amount, receiver);
            return true;
        } else {
            return false;
        }
    }
}
```

## New eth_getProof RPC method

Ganache now supports the **eth_getProof** RPC method, as specified by [EIP-1186](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-1186). This method returns some useful values, including hashes and proofs associated with the given address and storage keys. This method can be used as shown below:

```javascript

> const result = provider.request({

Reviewer: ```suggestion
const result = await provider.request({
```

  "method": "eth_getProof",
  "params": [
    // the address to query and generate proof for
    "0x7F0d15C7FAae65896648C8273B6d7E43f58Fa842", 
    // optional storage keys to generate proofs for
    ["0x56e81f171bcc55a6ff8345e692c0f86e5b48e01b996cadc001622fb5e363b421"], 
    // the block at which to generate the proof
    "latest" 
  ]
});
```
It should return the following output:

```json
{
  "accountProof": [
    "0xf90211a...0701bc80",
    "0xf90211a...0d832380",
    "0xf90211a...5fb20c80",
    "0xf90211a...0675b80",
    "0xf90151a0...ca08080"
  ],
  "balance": "0x0",
  "codeHash": "0xc5d2460186f7233c927e7db2dcc703c0e500b653ca82273b7bfad8045d85a470",
  "nonce": "0x0",
  "storageHash": "0x56e81f171bcc55a6ff8345e692c0f86e5b48e01b996cadc001622fb5e363b421",
  "storageProof": [
    {
      "key": "0x56e81f171bcc55a6ff8345e692c0f86e5b48e01b996cadc001622fb5e363b421",
      "proof": [
        "0xf90211a...0701bc80",
        "0xf90211a...0d832380"
      ],
      "value": "0x1"
    }
  ]
}
```

## Conclusion

> At Truffle, we remain committed to improving and simplifying the user experience for dapp developers in the Web3 ecosystem by creating developer tools, resources, and educational materials. With the monumental upgrade coming to Ethereum by mid-September, we're even more excited and committed to this course.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At Truffle, we remain committed to improving and simplifying the user experience for dapp developers in the Web3 ecosystem by creating developer tools, resources, and educational materials.
```

> To find out more about our suite of developer tools, visit the official [Truffle website](https://trufflesuite.com). If you have questions about The Merge and how it impacts our products feel free to start a discussion on our [Github Discussions channel](https://github.com/orgs/trufflesuite/discussions). Finally, don't forget to follow us on [Twitter](https://twitter.com/trufflesuite) for live announcements and updates.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To find out more about our suite of developer tools, visit the official [Truffle website](https://trufflesuite.com). If you have questions feel free to start a discussion on our [Github Discussions channel](https://github.com/orgs/trufflesuite/discussions). Finally, don't forget to follow us on [Twitter](https://twitter.com/trufflesuite) for regular announcements and updates.
```

---
title: Three new Ganache features to improve your developer experience
hide:
  - navigation
---

**By [Kingsley Arinze](https://twitter.com/heydamali)**

![The Merge and what it means for Truffle](./what-is-new-in-ganache.jpg)

Since the release of Ganache v7.0 in January, we’ve mostly focused our attention on bug fixes and UX improvements. Recently, we decided to expand our focus to also include new features that will help improve the developer experience for our users.

In addition, with the migration of Ethereum from PoW to PoS and the separation of the consensus layer from the execution layer, our users have been curious to know how Ganache is impacted and what actions they will need to take. 

> The simple answer to this very important question is: although [there are changes to how Ethereum clients will work post-merge](https://consensys.net/blog/ethereum-2-0/the-four-pillars-of-the-merge-to-proof-of-stake-how-ethereum-will-evolve), Ganache users do not need to do anything since these changes to Ethereum will not affect the user and dapp development experience.

Reviewer: I don't think this is relevant.

In this blog, we’ll touch on 3 of those new features that we've added to Ganache since the Ganache v7.0 release in January.

## Zero-config mainnet forking now available in the browser

> Ganache v7.0 made it possible to run Ganache in the browser. Simply add this script to your HTML:

Reviewer: If you "simply add this script" like this it won't work. Try out every example in this post and make sure they work, and the text descriptions make sense with the given examples. Please ping me again once you've made any necessary adjustments.

In this blog, we’ll touch on 3 new features that have been added to Ganache since the Ganache 7 release in January.

## Zero config mainnet forking now available in the browser

For some time now, it has been possible to run Ganache on the browser by simply including a minimal  javascript code in your HTML and then accessing the Ganache provider as shown below:

```javascript
<script src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/ganache@{VERSION}/dist/web/ganache.min.js"></script>

const options = {};
const provider = Ganache.provider(options);
```
Although adding the above lines of code would make the Ganache blockchain simulator available in your browser, features like the zero configuration mainnet forking wasn’t available.

However, with the latest release, Ganache users can now enjoy this feature on their browser by simply specifying additional options during setup as follows:

**Using websocket**

```javascript
...

> const options = {fork:"mainnet"};

Reviewer 2: This isn't using websockets. By default Ganache starts as an http server, and this option is just the basic forking option.

Also, the options here won't work, the format is `{namespace: { option: value }` 

So starting Ganache with forking:
``` TypeScript
const options = { fork: { network: "mainnet" } }
```

I don't really see the value of differentiating websockets and http for an explainer on the zero config mainnet forking feature, since the option for the actual forking part is the same for both. Maybe this can be simplified to just use http?

const provider = Ganache.provider(options);
```

Using HTTP and your Infura URL
```javascript
...

> const options = {fork:{url: "<your infura url goes here>"}};

Reviewer 2: The point of the "zero-config mainnet forking" feature is that users don't need to bring an infura URL - we have archive node access built in. So it seems weird to have the tutorial suggest this.

const provider = Ganache.provider(options);
```

You can verify that this is working by attempting to debug a mainnet transaction using the debug_traceTraction flag as follows:

```javascript

> console.log(await p.request({method:"debug_traceTransaction", params:["0x560900937892cd888a685c836f666804e05e04f3d161e1751ffb5ab7809c55d9"]}));

Reviewer 2: `debug_traceTransaction` can be one of our slower requests, and fetching "latest" would be just as much "proof" that we've successfully forked as debugging a transaction. So maybe it would be best just to fetch the latest block and log that. Also, we have previously been calling the provider variable `provider`, not `p`. It might confuse people that we've now switched to `p`. I suggest:
```javascript
// ... set up provider ...
const latestBlock = await provider.request({ method: "eth_getBlockByNumber", params: ["latest"] });
console.log(latestBlock); // will be mainnet's "latest" block
```

```

## Ability to use console.log from Solidity

If you use the Vyper `print` statement or the Hardhat `console.sol` library contract for printing items to the console, you can now use these tools together with Ganache, as Ganache now understands the Vyper `print` statement, as well as the Hardhat `console.sol` library!

> Truffle users aren’t left out either as they can install the console.log library by Ganache with `npm install @ganache/console.log` and use it in their solidity project as follows:

Reviewer 2: This feels awkward; consider:
```suggestion
Truffle users aren’t left out either as they can install Ganache's console.log library with `npm install @ganache/console.log` and use it in their solidity project as follows:
```
